---
layout: default
tags: [allonge, noindex]
---

> In number theory, a **left-truncatable prime** is a prime number which, in a given base, contains no 0, and if the leading ("left") digit is successively removed, then all resulting numbers are prime. For example, 9137, since 9137, 137, 37 and 7 are all prime. Decimal representation is often assumed.

> A **right-truncatable prime** is a prime which remains prime when the last ("right") digit is successively removed. 7393 is an example of a right-truncatable prime, since 7393, 739, 73, and 7 are all prime.

> --[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truncatable_prime)

### exploring truncatable primes

Truncatable primes have been thoroughly explored. But it is still interesting to explore them ourselves, for much the same reason that a beautiful mountain is still worth climbing, even if somebody else has already climbed it.

Now, we know that there are an infinite number of primes. The _reductio ad absurdum_ proof of this is easy to follow along:

> To prove that there are an infinite number of primes, we first assume the opposite--that there are a finite number of primes--and then show that this presumption leads to a contradiction.

> If there are a finite number of primes, there is some finite list of primes, call them p0, p1, p2, ..., pN, where "pN" is the largest prime. Now we know from other work in number theory that every number can be decomposed into a set of prime factors, even primes. The only thing special about primes in this respect is that their only prime factor is themselves.

> It follows then that every integer has one or more factors from the list p0, p1, p2, ..., pN and only this list. So now let us consider the number p0 times p1 times p2, ..., times pN. It is the product of all of the primes, and we will call it pN*. This is obviously not a prime. But what about the number pN* + 1?

> We also know from other work that if some number x is divisible by some prime p, the numbers x + y and x - y are not divisible by p unless y is divisible by p. The most trivial example is when y = 1, because 1 is not divisible by any prime. For example, the number 10 is divisible by 2 and 5, but the numbers 9 and 11 are not divisible by either 2 or 5.

> From this, we know that pN* + 1 is not divisible by any prime, be it p0, p1, p2, ..., or pN. But that contradicts our knowledge that all numbers have one or more prime factors! So, from this, we conclude that pN* + 1 must be divisible by some prime other than p0, p1, p2, ..., pN.

> This tells us that any finite list of primes is necessarily incomplete. Although pN* + 1 doesn't tell us which prime is missing from our list, it does tell us that there is another, and furthermore, it sets an bound on how sparse primes may be.

> (also, if p0, p1, p2, ..., pN is a complete set of primes between 2 and pN, we know that there is at least one prime between pN + 1 and pN* + 1, inclusive. The next prime larger than pN cannot be larger than pN + 1.)

Ok, that is middle-school mathematics. What about _truncatable_ primes? Are there an infinite number of them?

### are there an infinite number of truncatable primes?

One way to settle this question is with a clever bit of reasoning, like the proof that there are an infinite number of primes. But while that's the elegant way, it's not the only way.

Some mathematical problems can be solved by brute force. If you have an abbey full of mathematically minded monks, you can solve a brute force probblem in a couple of decades. It's a matter of figuring out how to enumerate all of the cases, divide up the work, and wait.

No abbey? No problem, today we have computers. How can we put a computer to work to brute-force the problem?